[bitnami/*] Update testing documentation (#14532)
bitnami/charts: TESTING.md

  * [Run it locally](#run-it-locally-1)
  * [Specific acceptance criteria](#specific-acceptance-criteria-1)
* [GOSS](#goss)
  * [Run it locally](#run-it-locally-2)
  * [Useful information](#useful-information-1)
  * [Specific acceptance criteria](#specific-acceptance-criteria-2)

## Where to find the tests

All the assets have an associated folder inside [/.vib](https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/main/.vib) with their tests implementations (the subfolders `cypress`, `goss` and/or `ginkgo`) and files containing their test plans (`vib-verify.json` and `vib-publish.json`). More on the latter in [VIB pipeline files](#vib-pipeline-files).

## VMware Image Builder (VIB)

The service that powers the verification of the thousands of monthly tests performed in the repository is VMware Image Builder. VMware Image Builder (VIB) is a platform-agnostic, API-first modular service that allows large enterprises and independent software vendors to automate the packaging, **verification**, and publishing processes of software artifacts on any platform and cloud.

For more information about VIB, you can refer to [its official page](https://tanzu.vmware.com/image-builder).

## VIB pipeline files

> The CI/CD pipeline in the repository is configured to trigger VIB when an asset needs to be verified. But as every application is different, VIB needs to be supplied with a definition of the set of actions and configurations that precisely describe the verification process to perform. This is the role of the aforementioned `vib-verify.json` and `vib-publish.json` files, which every asset defines and can be found alongside its tests inside the `/.vib` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CI/CD pipelines in the repository are configured to trigger VIB when an asset needs to be verified. But as every application is different, VIB needs to be supplied with a definition of the set of actions and configurations that precisely describe the verification process to perform in each case. This is the role of the aforementioned `vib-verify.json` and `vib-publish.json` files, which every asset defines and can be found alongside its tests inside the `/.vib` folder.
```

        ...
      },
      "actions": [
        {
          "action_id": "health-check",
          "params": {
            "endpoint": "lb-jenkins-http",
            "app_protocol": "HTTP"
          }
        },
        {
          "action_id": "goss",
          "params": {
            "resources": {
              "path": "/.vib/jenkins/goss"
            },
            "remote": {
              "workload": "deploy-jenkins"
            },
            "vars_file": "vars.yaml"
          }
        },
        {
          "action_id": "cypress",
          "params": {
            "resources": {
              "path": "/.vib/jenkins/cypress"
            },
            "endpoint": "lb-jenkins-http",
            "app_protocol": "HTTP",
            "env": {
              "username": "user",
              "password": "ComplicatedPassword123!4"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

This guide will focus in the `verify` phase section, in which there are some things to remark:

> * There is a list of the actions to execute as part of the testing plan (see `actions`). Namely, this example includes a `health-check`, an instance of `goss` tests and another instance of `cypress` tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There is a list of the actions to execute as part of the testing plan. Namely, this example includes a `health-check`, an instance of `goss` tests and another instance of `cypress` tests.
```

> * For each of the `actions`, VIB will deploy **a brand new release** of the chart under test. Consequently, the state between actions is not shared.

Reviewer: Just a suggestion to make it clearer:
```suggestion
* For each of the `actions`, VIB will deploy **a brand new release** of the chart provided by `verify.context.resources.path`. Consequently, the state between actions is not shared.
```

> * The installation of the chart can be customized via `runtime_parameters`, which should be encoded using base64. See the [Runtime parameters](#runtime-parameters) sections for further information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The installation of the chart can be customized via `runtime_parameters`, which should be encoded using base64. See the [Runtime parameters](#runtime-parameters) section for further information.
```

Some examples on the suitability of tests for the `bitnami/wordpress` chart:
 * ✅ Creating a blog post (represents the CORE functionality of the asset)
 * ❌ Creating a comment in a post (far too specific, not useful)
 * ❌ Installing a plugin through the admin panel (far too specific, not useful)
 * ✅ Specifying a different UID using the `containerSecurityContext.runAsUser` in `values.yaml` and checking it (checks a feature intrinsic to the Chart)

The tests may be regarded as _deployment_ tests since their goal is to verify that the software is correctly deployed with all the inherent features. Both functional and non-functional characteristics are evaluated in these tests, focusing on the installation aspect.

### The strategy

> Before writing any test scenario, understand the primary purpose of the chart and its components. Take a look at [the documentation about the chart under test](https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/main/bitnami), explore the different templates and configurations in `values.yaml` and glance over the [docker image documentation](https://github.com/bitnami?q=docker&type=all&language=&sort=). This will give you a solid base for creating valuable test scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before writing any test scenario, understand the primary purpose of the chart and its components. Take a look at [the documentation about the chart under test](https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/main/bitnami), explore the different templates and configurations in `values.yaml` and glance over the [docker image documentation](https://github.com/bitnami/containers). This will give you a solid base for creating valuable test scenarios.
```

As Charts are usually composed of a number of different components, it is also essential to test their integrations and the Chart as a whole. As a general guideline, testing a `bitnami/chart` can be reduced to:

1. Identifying the components of the Chart and verifying their integration. *e.g. WordPress + MariaDB + PHP + Data Volume*
1. Summarizing the main area features the asset offers and asserting the Chart delivers them. *e.g. Creating a post in a blog*
1. Focusing on the unique features the Chart offers. *e.g. ConfigMaps, PVCs, Services, secrets, etc.*

It is easily noticeable though that Charts are usually highly configurable artifacts. Through parameters exposed in `values.yaml`, it is fairly common to perform customizations that range from enabling simple features (e.g. exporting metrics to Prometheus) to complete changes in the architecture of the application that will be deployed (e.g. standalone vs. main-secondary replication in DBs). In order to cope with this high variability, we should:

* Stick to the KISS (Keep It Short and Simple) principle: only test/consider the features that are enabled by default.

> * When params allow to customize the deployment architecture, give preference to: (1) the more representative blueprint and (2) the one provides more code-covering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When params allow to customize the deployment architecture, give preference to: (1) the more representative blueprint and (2) the one that provides more code-covering.
```

* Change the values for parameters of features enabled by default. This allows to ensure they are correctly picked up by the Chart.

#### Runtime parameters

> Helm allows to customize how a Chart is deployed [during its installation](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/using_helm/#customizing-the-chart-before-installing). The subset of parameters from `values.yaml` (and their values) that are passed in [during a Helm Chart installation](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/using_helm/#customizing-the-chart-before-installing) are referred to as runtime/installation/deployment parameters in this guide. They are of **uttermost** importance as they have a great impact on the instance under test.

Reviewer: Is the duplicated use of the link done on purpose? I think we can leave only one of them.

Author: Yes, I think I missed removing one of the two.

  * Login/Logout: Checks the UI, app, and DB are working together
  * Basic functionality test

* Avoid multiple tests for the same block of functionality.

* If the asset exposes an API, Cypress is an excellent option to test this feature!

### Specific acceptance criteria

* [ ] Test file name has the following format: Helm chart name + spec (ex: `wordpress_spec.js`)
* [ ] No `describe()` blocks should be present
* [ ] Aim to have an assertion after every command to avoid flakiness, taking advantage of Cypress retry-ability
* [ ] Test description is a sentence with the following format: Expected result summary, starting with a verb, in third person, no dots at the end of the sentence (ex: `it('checks if admin can edit a site', ()`)
* [ ] Respect the folder structure recommended by Cypress:
  * [fixtures](https://docs.cypress.io/api/commands/fixture) - for test data
  * [Integration](https://docs.cypress.io/api/commands/fixture) - test scenario
  * [plugins](https://docs.cypress.io/guides/tooling/plugins-guide) - plugin configuration, if applicable
  * [support](https://docs.cypress.io/api/commands/fixture) - reusable behaviours and overrides

>   * [cypress.json](https://docs.cypress.io/guides/tooling/plugins-guide) - configuration values you wish to store

Reviewer: We should revisit these links and maybe add https://docs.cypress.io/guides/core-concepts/writing-and-organizing-tests

* [ ] DOM selectors should be resilient. See best practices [here](https://docs.cypress.io/guides/references/best-practices#Selecting-Elements)
* [ ] Unnecessary waiting should be avoided

> * [ ] Apply the following code style:

Reviewer: Should we mention the formatter we use for these files?

Author: I don't think we need to mention the specific formatter we are using, but the rules. This way, anyone can use their prefer tool.

  * Semicolons should be used
  * Lines over 80 columns long should preferably be devided into sensible chunks
  * Prefer single-quotes over double ones for strings
  * Use template literals (\`The value is: ${var}\`) for string interpolation

## Ginkgo

[Ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/#top) is one of the frameworks used to implement integration tests. Related files should be located under `/.vib/ASSET/ginkgo`. It is the reference tool to use when tests require interaction with the K8s cluster.

In order for VIB to execute Ginkgo tests, the following block of code needs to be defined in the corresponding [VIB pipeline files](#vib-pipeline-files) (`/.vib/ASSET/vib-{verify,publish}.json`).

> Values denoted withing dollar signs (`$$VALUE$$`) should be treated as placeholders

```json
        {
          "action_id": "ginkgo",
          "params": {
            "resources": {
              "path": "/.vib/$$ASSET$$/ginkgo"
            },
            "params": {
              "kubeconfig": "{{kubeconfig}}",
              "namespace": "{{namespace}}",
              "$$PARAM_3$$": "$$VALUE_3$$",
              ...
            }
          }
        }
```

> 

Reviewer: For Ginkgo, a `Useful information` section could give an overview of the most common use cases:

- Log checking for a scratch/k8s native pod
- Deployment of CRDs objects from an operator
- Usage of the `extraDeploys` parameter to simplify ginkgo logic

    ```

1. Download and [install Ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/#installing-ginkgo) in your system
1. Execute the tests. Provide the necessary params (usually, the path to the kubeconfig file and namespace name, but check `vib-verify.yaml`).

    ```bash
    $ cd .vib/metallb/ginkgo
    $ ginkgo -- --kubeconfig=./kube.config --namespace=default
      Running Suite: MetalLB Integration Tests - /.vib/metallb/ginkgo
      ===============================================================
      Random Seed: 1674578785
      Will run 1 of 1 specs

      Ran 1 of 1 Specs in 1.341 seconds
      SUCCESS! -- 1 Passed | 0 Failed | 0 Pending | 0 Skipped
      PASS

      Ginkgo ran 1 suite in 6.895174927s
      Test Suite Passed
    ```

### Specific acceptance criteria

* [ ] Test file name has the following format: Helm chart name + `test` (ex: `metallb_test.go`)
* [ ] Helper functions should be placed in an additional file named `integration_suite_test.go`
* [ ] Created cluster resources must be cleaned up after execution

## GOSS

> [GOSS](https://github.com/aelsabbahy/goss/blob/master/docs/manual.md) is one of the frameworks used to implement integration tests. Related files should be located under `/.vib/ASSET/goss`. It is the reference tool to use when tests require interaction with a specific pod.

Reviewer: I would also add that, differently from Cypress and Ginkgo, Goss is executed from inside the pod.

    ```bash
    $ kubectl get pods
    NAME                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    nginx-5fbc8786f-95rpl   1/1     Running   0          17m

    $ kubectl cp ./goss-linux-amd64 nginx-5fbc8786f-95rpl:/tmp/
    $ kubectl cp .vib/nginx/goss/goss.yaml nginx-5fbc8786f-95rpl:/tmp/
    $ kubectl cp .vib/nginx/goss/vars.yaml nginx-5fbc8786f-95rpl:/tmp/
    ```
1. Grant execution permissions to the binary and launch the tests

    ```bash
    $ kubectl exec -it nginx-5fbc8786f-95rpl -- chmod +x /tmp/goss-linux-amd64
    $ kubectl exec -it nginx-5fbc8786f-95rpl -- /tmp/goss-linux-amd64 --gossfile /tmp/goss.yaml --vars /tmp/vars.yaml validate
    .........

    Total Duration: 0.011s
    Count: 9, Failed: 0, Skipped: 0
    ```

### Specific acceptance criteria

* [ ] Main test file name should be `goss.yaml`
* [ ] Deployment-related parameters should be specified in a file named `vars.yaml`. This is a subset of the `runtime_parameters`
* [ ] Use templating to parametrize tests with the help of the `vars.yaml` file
* [ ] Tests should not rely on system packages (e.g. `curl`). Favor built-in GOSS primitives instead

> * [ ] Only check paths and configuration files that are injected/used by the Helm Chart (configmap, PVC, ...). Do not check the ones already present in the container

Reviewer: I understand what you want to say, but I think this can be misleading. As you noted above, we sometimes need to check config files are using the values defined at `runtime_parameters`.
